I'm talking today about phenomenology. Now, today in my professional life, I spend a lot
of time doing formal ontology, which is very closely related to a non-phenomenological kind
of philosophy called the analytic philosophy, logical philosophy. For a long time in my life,
I work on phenomenology. And this is what this is about. And so it has a kind of,
I wouldn't say oldy-worldy flavor, although it does go back 50 years. But it does deal with some
of the reasons why my life progressed phenomenologically as it did. So it started with the very first
philosophy book that I had in my hands in school, which was Wittgenstein's Traptators.
I was about to go to university to study mathematics. Wittgenstein's Traptators convinced
me that I should study mathematics and philosophy. And I did this in Oxford for three years. So
I was at Jesus College, which is somewhere at the back there. I was there for three years as an
undergraduate. And the one person who really influenced me was Michael Dumit, who is a specialist
on Frege and on a view of analytic philosophy, as rooted not just in Frege's ideas, but in
the idea that studying language could be the key tool to unlock philosophical problems.
And during my stay in Oxford, I had dreams of writing a PhD. My goal was to write a PhD on
the aesthetics of mathematics. So the idea would be that mathematical theorems
or chess games or musical works can have aesthetic properties. I did end up writing
a PhD thesis, but it was about something quite different. And my change came about by accident.
Roman Ingaarden was the key and this book changed my plans. All right, then I moved to the University
of Manchester, which is where I lived, and which was the only place in England at that time where
you could study phenomenology. I was a student working, well, on my thesis, which is called
I used a typewriter. If I made any mistakes, I had to write out top copy and the carbon copy.
It's 600 and something pages long. I didn't know what hellish waste of time I was going through
because we didn't have computers in those days. And it's about Hossel, Frege, Dumit and Mino.
But it's about ontology in the classical philosophical sense. It's about how these people
study beings, entities formally. And during that time, I met two philosophers, philosophy students
who were also doing a PhD in Manchester at the same time. Peter Simons became quite famous
in various universities. He finished in Trinity College, Dublin. And Kevin finished and hasn't
quite finished yet in the University of Geneva. So all right, this is Manchester. After my PhD,
I moved to a postdoc in another Northern English University. And then I moved back to Manchester
as a faculty member. I inherited the position of my PhD supervisor who retired. So I was responsible
for phenomenology in the philosophy department in Manchester, which was very much dominated
by what we might call American. Americans are of two types. On the one hand, there are Americans
who do American philosophy. And then on the other hand, there are English people who do
American philosophy. I was the only person doing philosophy in a European sense. So Peter and
Kevin and I published a lot together. We worked a lot together. We organized many meetings together
and we changed the world. This was one of the papers which was quite successful and still
successful that there's a whole industry of truth making, which we more or less initiated in 1984.
And on my door in the philosophy department in Manchester, I had this sign that to indicate that
you were now going into the world of European philosophy. This comes from the Berlin Wall.
I guess you all know what the Berlin Wall is. Checkpoints, Darley and all that. The centre
of all of this work with Peter and Kevin was not in Garden, but in Garden's teacher,
Husser, who was the founder of phenomenology and who was born in Austria, Hungary. And a lot of the
work I did subsequently between 1990 and 2000 or 1918, 2000, was it about Austro-Hungarian philosophy,
including Husser. Normally counted as a German philosophy because he spent his mature life in
Germany, but he was born in Austria-Hungary and like many of the other people I'm going to talk
about, even the Poles I'm going to talk about, they were born in Austria too and they were certainly
not part of Poland because Poland didn't exist. All right, so formal ontology. The term comes from
Husser's logical investigations and both Peter and Kevin and I thought that Husser's logical
investigations and specifically the logical investigation number three on the theory of
holes and parts was the key to doing good philosophy. So we thought that many of the
targets of analytic philosophy were important to work on, but the proper method was to be found
in Husser. So this is the first formal theory of myriology, theory of parts and parts. And more
generally, it presents something called formal ontology, which is the theory of ontological
structures, which are formal in the sense that they are domain neutral, not material in the
sense of being related to matter, but material in the sense of being domain, non-neutral, domain
specific. And relations like part whole, instance of, and so forth, are formal relations. All right,
so these are the main parts of Husser's formal ontology. He was very keen on the idea of a theory
of dependence relations and theories of boundaries and continuities, topology, and then theories of
instantiation of species and lowest specific differences and so forth. So this is pretty
old fashioned in the sense that most of it is found in some form in Aristotle. But Husser
saw, and Husser was originally a mathematician, saw that you could treat these kinds of issues
in a formal way in the sense of that mathematics also is formed. So formal logic, formal ontology,
and formal axiology, which Husser also dealt with, are all very much related to mathematics.
30 years later, probably in Italy, but that's neither here nor there, I created something
called basic formal ontology. And this has become very important. This is what I work on
all the time now. And this includes all of the things that Husser thought were important parts
of formal ontology, together with a much more specific treatment of spacetime of processes
and of what we call realizable entities, which means dispositions, powers, functions, roles,
and so forth. So basic formal ontology is very much rooted in Husser's logical investigations,
and it adds these particular ingredients. The idea is to create a top level ontology,
which will not merely be domain neutral, but will be domain all encompassing. In other words,
every formal ontological need of any ontology will be met by BFO. I don't claim that is the case yet,
but it will be the case maybe in 50 years. So it's hard work. All right, so we have formal ontology,
which deals with the interconnections of things, and we have formal logic, which deals with the
interconnections of truths. And that too corresponds broadly with Husser's account of the relation.
He was not always clear when he was using the word formal to distinguish formal ontology and
formal logic. But this corresponds to the view, the general view, who is presenting in the logical
investigations. And so these are ontological structures. So that's John and that's Mary,
and they are independent entities. So they're not dependent on anything else,
in the sense of dependent, which Husser was talking about. But they are in love with each other.
And so there is a relational quality of love, which is symmetric, which is one-sidedly dependent
on John and one-sidedly dependent on Mary. And we represent that in this way. So dependent entities
have dotted lines and independent entities have solid lines and relations that are captured
representationally by using single lines connecting boxes. And here we see two kinds of relations.
Dependence relations are what we can think of as thin relations, and love and hate and
marriage and magnetic attraction are thick relations. They have empirical properties of
various sorts. And there is a third kind of relation, which are comparative, such as being
taller than. But in any case, there's more than one kind of relation. In predicate logic, of course,
people don't realize that. And so one of the activities that we engaged in during this period
was attacking analytic philosophers because they thought that predicate logic gave you a key
to creating a mirror of the universe. And they got it wrong. Husser and Aristotle came closer
to getting it wrong. All right, so that's a relation. And then we can have also two-sided
mutual dependence. And well, we'll give some examples of this later on. But you can see how
these kinds of diagrams can grow to deal with more complicated entities. Maybe this is the
marriage bond between John and Mary. And then Mary has a claim on John and John has an obligation
to marry that kind of thing. Then the claim and the obligation will be mutually dependent.
We'll come back to these things later on. And then we can illustrate part-whole relations. So love
may include going on holiday. You go on holiday together. And that would be a part of the general
relation of love in this particular case, although that example is not a very good one.
All right. So now we get to the structure of the universe. So Husser's idea is that there are
relations which we find in the universe, which are essential relations. Now, again, Aristotle saw
this story. This is not really anything new. But dependence relations are essential relations
in this sense. And there are laws of essence which capture these necessary relations. And
dependence between the love of John for Mary and John is an essential relation. A love cannot exist
without a lover, a subject. That's an essential relation called necessitation. If love exists,
then there is some lover, not necessarily to, but in the happy instances, then it will go in both
worlds. To say that love is compatible with kindness is to express an essential relation. To say that
love is incompatible with plotting to murder is another example, maybe one of these essential
relations. And similar, that means that love excludes plotting to murder. So we have here some,
again, not very good examples of laws of essence. And this is going to play an important role in
the whole of phenomenology. And Kit Van, who is the world's greatest living metaphysician.
All right. So all of this is being represented, practiced, formulated in German. And so we have
a very important word, Vesens zusammen, which means something like essential structure or
essential configuration. And Vesens Gazette, which means essential law, that we are interested in
the Vesens zusammen, Hinger, the essential structures. And we don't call them essential
structures. When I say we know, I need your slant paper myself, we're working on mathematics and
physics ontology. There are essential structures in those domains. But we, the word, if the phrase
essential structure doesn't work quite so well, as reasons to them, particularly if you're German.
All right. Now, so we have formal ontological relations like dependence. And we also have
formal ontological categories, which correspond to material ontological categories or domain
specific categories such as rabbit or mammal or cell. But they're all formal. And these are the
main examples mentioned by Husser, object state affairs and so on. And you can put these together
in law governed ways. For instance, you can create object aggregates, or you can create
states of affairs by taking an object in the property. You say the property
of this object or this object has this property, that is a state of affairs.
So now formal ontology is like formal logic. Once we've grasped a formal structure in one
instance, we have grasped it for every instance. That's why logic is so powerful. That's why
mathematics is so powerful. Formal ontology is similarly powerful. That's why BFO is so powerful.
And we've, we ain't seen nothing yet. All right, now compare it as the epic, and this is a phrase from
Husser, if the relevant formal ontology has been worked out, then all deductive theoretical work
in the building up of all actual theories in the same form has been done.
So I've said that, and we've said that, and we've said that. And now we can, we come to definitions.
Now Husser, Aristotle had an idea of definitions. And we have to remember that all sciences,
including the science of definitions are perfect to the extent that Aristotle treated
of them. So here Bonaventure is just explicating what Aristotle would have said. If we want a
definition, we want to explicate the meanings of terms. And we succeed when the intellect can use
the definition to grasp, comprehend what a thing is. In other words, what type of thing a thing is.
But definitions are constructed by use, using more universal terms. So a cat is an object,
which is a mammal, which is, I don't, which meow, I don't know. A human is a, a substance,
which is an animal and disruption. We always go to a higher level to form, make a definition.
This was the rule for making definitions in terms of the, including genus, plus the specific
difference, which makes the term you're defining refer to those things which fall under the term,
the species term rather than the genus term. So what makes a human different from an animal is
that the human has a specific difference in being rationed, according to Aristotle,
in some places, in other places he has a different stroke. So, but definitions are
constructed by use, using more universal terms. And these are defined by still more universal
terms until we come to the highest and most universal. And we can't define that because
we're already at the top. And this is where, this is where the top was for Aristotle. And this is
where the top and basic formal ontology is, is, is named after this passage in the third logic
of investigation where he'll sell was the first person ever to use the phrase formal ontology.
So this is where the top ends really. This is, this is Aristotle plus some more things. This is
one quarter of BFO minus all the relations. All right, and this is the ISO standard. Aristotle
didn't get to the point where he had an ISO standard. All right, these are now some of the
examples of the some 400 or so domain ontologies, which are defined into domain specific ontologies
defined in the Saint Blaine adventure Aristotelian way on the basis of BFO.
And the mental functioning ontology takes BFO and then adds more terms in roughly this kind of way.
The emotion ontology takes the mental functioning ontology and adds yet more terms to create an
ontology of the different aspects of emotions, not kinds, but aspects, because every emotion
involves a physiological response, every emotion involves an emotional action tendency and so
and these are some examples of these aspects of emotions in the emotional ontology. So
muscles becoming tense or feeling weak and sweating. So all right, now, so we've had this
all of this was happening in Germany, to some degree in Austria, as we will see later,
some degree even in Poland during the 1900s to 1930, but already much earlier parallel
things were going on in Austria. And I wrote a book about some of these things
in the realm of economics. And there are quite close relations between Austrian philosophy on the
one hand, and Austrian economics, partly because some of them lived in the same building or had
cousins who were married to each other. All right, no, the cousins were not married. All right.
So Karl Manger was the founder of a school called the Austrian School of Economics,
which still exists today. There are still whole sections of economics departments,
for instance, in New York University, which are devoted to this school. It's meant to be a counter
to the Keynesian classical or neoclassical schools of economics. And the original versions of
Austrian economics were about laws of essence or reasons, because that's in the realm of economics.
And this is an example. A good exists only if simultaneously we have a need, a causal connection
to the satisfaction of this need, a knowledge of this causal connection, and a command over the
theme sufficient to direct it to satisfy the need. And Manger wrote whole books based upon this kind
of essential analysis, which is an analysis of part whole relations as well as dependence
relations. So it's very much in the spirit of Hossel. So the goal of research in economics can
only be the determination of the general essence and the general connection of economic phenomena.
And these essences are things like buying, selling, ordering, contracting, and so forth.
And in the 20th century, Ludwig von Mises became even more famous than Manger.
He thought that all of economics could be captured in one single axiom, which is the axiom
man acts. And if you know what acting is, then you know everything about preferences and so forth.
And I don't think that Mises was quite right. But I think that the a prioristic view of economics
has a lot to be said in its favor. And I tried to express these things in this paper.
Murray Rothbard was a famous third generation member of this school. And he actually wrote a
very kind and friendly review of the book on Austrian philosophy, which I showed you.
And then there is Hermann Hoppe, who is a very interesting strange case.
I don't think I'm going to tell any jokes about Hermann Hoppe. Although I like him,
he's a nice man, but there are too many things you can make jokes about. So one of his books is
A Defensive Monarchy, which is, of course, correct, but you shouldn't say that. All right, now
what we're really interested in is something which I call the Munich-Gertingen-Krakow school.
And it's sometimes just called a Munich school. If you're being really clever, it's called the
Munich-Gertingen school. But I call it the Munich-Gertingen-Krakow school or Krakow. And the
Munich school began in Munich, and some of the leading members of the Munich school are listed
here. There are several others of equal importance, but I'm going to be focusing on these people.
And then we move into Poland. So Hermann Ingarn was a member of the Munich school who then
reconstituted it in Poland. And Karol Wojtyła is a... So in German, you can put the verb at the end
of the sentence. You can't do that here. Karol Wojtyła was a friend of Roman Ingarn and also a
philosopher, also very closely connected to Max Schäger, who's another member of the Munich
school. But we'll come back to him in a minute. All right, so they extended Hossal's formal
ontology to create material ontologies, just like all of these people are doing BFO.
So they worked on, usually on quite philosophical topics, but Reiner, for instance, worked on law.
Edith Stein worked on the state. Ingarn worked on art and many other things. And Wojtyła worked
on things like freedom and conscience and religion, I'm told. All right, so...
And Hossal hated it. So he said it was a picture book phenomenon ontology. This is not real
philosophy. Who cares about whether it's real philosophy? Nowadays, it's being shown to be
quite practically important. This is what he... So he was a real admirer of Reiner, for instance,
but he didn't like the Munich idea that you can take a discipline and then subject it to
essential analysis. So this is the Goettingen school, or the four important bits of it.
Ingarn was in Goettingen, Edith Stein was in Goettingen, serving as the slave of Hossal and
Reiner. It makes him look a lot older, but he never became a lot older. And then Krakow,
we have this gentleman, and two of these people became saints. Now, that's amazing. You have a
rather small school of philosophy, and two of his members became saints. And anyway, we'll come back
to that. So these were very close friends. Ingarn and Edith Stein were very close friends.
There were other female members of the Munich school. I'm not going to talk about them because
there isn't time, but on many occasions during the rest of these slides, and there are only about
300 of them, I'm going to use him. And many of the slides were put together some years ago,
when we could say him. And many of the people I'm citing also said him. But in many cases, I mean
her or him. So forgive me for the him, the repetitious use of the word him, in what follows.
All right, so this is Edith Stein, otherwise known as Saint Therese, Benedicta Acroce. She
merited the recognition of her sainthood because of what she did in Auschwitz, because she was a Jew.
She had a rather bad time because she was female. This was a time when females were not taken seriously
in universities. But she was brilliant. And she wrote major parts of some of herself major works.
So she was his, a slave is a bit unfair. But he never made her his assistant in where he would
have made a male is assistant. And so there is a book called walls are crumbling, which is about
seven modern modern Jewish philosophical thinkers who have turned to the Catholic faith.
Now, in order to become a saint, you have to become Catholic. That's taken for granted.
We're going to be talking about four of these. And I own a copy of this book, but I couldn't
find it in time to work out what he says about Husser. But I do remember what he says about
Reinach. And I'm not sure if this picture was available on the web. It's a picture of Husser,
I think on his death bed. So Good Friday, what a wonderful day where some of Husser's last words.
Yes, Christ has forgiven us everything. Now, I'm not sure that that's true. I think that
us right here exaggerate. And you can make up yourself, make up your own mind. So this man
was described by Husser as the phenomenologists, phenomenologists, because he was a very good
teacher who knew Husser's ideas probably better than Husser himself. And so people like Edith
Stein and Inga became phenomenologists because of Reinach's fantastic teaching capability.
He was a nice man and part of a nice family. But then he was called up to be a member of the
German army in the First World War. So he died at the age of 34. He published one major book
before he died and several very important essays. We've managed to collect other writings and publish
them. I was, well, we'll see what I did in that regard in a minute. In this book, World's a Crumbling,
Ursus Reicher describes, so his sister became a nun when Reinach died in the trench.
He'd been communicating with his sister with letters and his letters survived about faith
and Christianity and so on. Reinach never became a Catholic through a proper process of conversion,
but he was certainly a Christian. He was certainly not a Jew. He was born a Jew.
And so his sister became a nun. And you have to be a Catholic to become a nun. And she was,
I don't know the technical terms here, but she was admitted into the convent by the Abbas
with the following words. The Abbas knew Adolf. Today, we shall receive unto our number someone
who even according to the flesh is a sister of our Lord. Now, this is like comparing Reinach to God.
And maybe it happened, I don't know, but Ursus Reicher said that. Now, Reinach was a proponent
of phenomenological realism and Reinach has been taken more seriously in the French and
Italian speaking world than in English speaking world, but we're catching up. And this is a book
of Reinach's papers about phenomenological realism. Now, you have to realize that to be an ontologist
in the sense of immunity school or in the sense of BFO, you have to be a realist. That is to say,
you have to believe you're describing the world and representing the essences or universals of
kinds in the world. And so the many phenomenologists were all realists. In around 1910, people say,
Hossal fell on his head and this damaged relevant brain circuits. And so from that point,
they say he was an idealist. He didn't believe in the real world anymore. Neither did his major
followers. He became a famous representative of the German tradition of transcendental philosophy.
So he was like Hegel, Kant, and so forth. He picks at himself now as a great man in German
philosophy, which he was able to do, even though he was Jewish at that time, because people didn't
care. They did later. And so he really was treated as a great German philosopher by
the German philosophers of the time, and by the realist philosophers at the time. But they
argued with each other. And so there was a kind of interchange, a dialectic between the realists,
particularly Inga, who wrote several major works on this topic, and Hossal, who tried to fight back,
and in a way, the realists lost in the sense that they never convinced Hossal to become,
to go back to being a realist. But they won in the sense that they created a lot of very good
ontology, which we will talk about in a minute. Reina's principle,
in the sense of most well-recognized contribution, was to invent or formulate for the first time,
in an extended way, the theory of speech acts. So normally people think of that
theory as having been invented by Austen and Searle. The first hints of theory along these lines can
be found much earlier. In Thomas Reid, for instance, there are several passages which
describe what later became speech acts. Reina has a whole monograph devoted to the topic.
And it's a monograph which is about what he calls the a priori foundations of the civil law.
The a priori foundations of the civil law are to be found in something like an analysis of the act of
promising. And the act of promising is the principle example in many of the papers.
In the Austen and Searle tradition about speech acts. And so I, along with a German
colleague of mine, a brilliant man who died, also died much too young, edited the complete
text critical edition of Reina's works. It's 848 pages. And it's the most honest thing I ever
did in my life. So it really is a very, very scholarly piece of work. We have a whole volume
just to show all the changes, including misprints in different editions and so forth. Because that's
what the scholarly edition has to do. And if you don't do that, someone else will have to do it later.
So I spent some years devoting my life to Reina. I was one of the few people who were
attempting to show to the world that Reina had interest in things to say. And that the whole
tradition of analytic philosophy should be viewed in a new life. So
I asked chat GPT about this content, whether we were successful. Is there a contemporary
reception of Reina's philosophy? And so I asked this question twice. This is the first
at least twice. Some notable philosophers who have engaged with Reina's ontology of social
entities include John Searle. And then it says Searle has been a prominent advocate for Reina's
ontology of social entity. Now I've talked to Searle on multiple occasions. If I even come
close to mentioning the name Reina, he gets angry. He hates the idea that Reina would even exist,
because his wife also used to get angry. That would diminish the greatness of Searle. I like
Searle, I think it's fantastic. But this is a blatant lie. Similarly, Raimo Tuonella, who also
works on social ontology, he says, has also been influenced by Reina's ontology of social
entities. That's just not true. Then it says Barry Smith, well, this is in bigger type here,
Barry Smith has been a critic of Reina's ontology of social entities. That's
disgustingly not true. And then it says something rather bland about Kevin. So Kevin has also
engaged with Reina's ontology. That's true. But it's weak. Typically, chat GP team is weak when
it's when it says something which is true, which isn't always the case. And then I asked it again.
So it says, again, it gives the absurd thesis about Searle. Right, Hussal was a very
strong admirer of Reina. I don't think he was heavily influenced by Reina. He was an admirer
of Reina, because Reina was heavily influenced by him. Shaila knew about Reina. They were both
members of the Munich School. And I think this is just about true. Searle, we dealt with.
Charles Taylor has no idea who Reina is. And Rudolf Karna has absolutely no idea of Reina
and wouldn't care. And so, and then I try again. Now he mentions Ingellen, which is good, but he
mentions Dagfin Follersdahl, who was quite an important analytic philosopher who wrote
a piece about Hussal early on. But he never knew anything about Reina. This is just
typical chat GPT lying. And then we asked it for a fourth time, and it gave this list.
I mean, including Emmanuel Evina. And I don't even know if Georgio Agamben is, but he sounds
French. I mean, French in the sense of bad French philosophy, not French in the sense of not being
Italian. And somebody called Jacques. And so this is a real mystery. None of these. Most of the
people on this list didn't know who Reina was. Most of them would have hated the idea of Reina's
philosophy. So why does chat GPT think that all, I don't know, 17 of these people
have engaged with Reina's ontology of social entities? Well, I think the problem is Kevin.
Kevin wrote a piece on, well, so Derrida, the ends of phenomenology, attacking
many of the names on this list. And chat GPT has this piece in its training material. And so it just
Reina, Derrida, same page. So that means Derrida must have influenced Reina for something.
And all right, now,
Reina was very clever. He knew how to read philosophy. And he read Hume's treatise. And he
realized that there was a mistake being made, and still being made today on part of people who
are fans of Hume's philosophy. The one person who doesn't make this mistake is George Davies,
who I believe is now no longer alive. But he was a Scottish philosopher. Hume was Scottish.
But he was also interested in Hussal and Reina. And he wrote this piece
in which he explained that even Hume distinguished between the analytic and the
materially necessary. So in Reina's terms, the relations between red and orange and red and
yellow. So red and orange are more closely resembling each other than red and yellow.
That is a material necessity. It's not the formal necessity. So it's not analytic.
It's a material necessity. Most people will tell you that there are no material necessities in Hume's
philosophy. But Reina found passages in which Hume appeals to material necessities,
particularly passages where he's talking about sense date. So if you're interested,
you can look at this piece by Davies. And that's Kant. That's Kant from a different angle.
And this is a very nice paper on this whole unique phenomenology. And this is a passage from
this piece. So this man, Fréchette, who is French, but in a good way, he has a very nice
account of the essential structures, the work of the Munich phenomenologists. And he points out
that Kit Fein has rediscovered some of the theses relating to essential structures and modality
which were worked out by the Munich phenomenologists 100 years earlier.
All right. So just so that we all have the same terminology, to say that something is a
analytic means that it's a truth of logic or of mathematics. And it's a tautology. It doesn't
add anything to what we said. Synthetic is a truth with content, which means it's not
reducible to any logical truth. A priori is a matter of knowledge. To say that something is
a priori is to say that it's known independently of experience. And to say that it's a posteriori,
a priori is to say that it's known by experience and had to be known by experience. You couldn't
know it by logic. And Q is commonly held to believe that everything a priori is also analytic.
And the Munich philosophers like me and like many other people hold that there are
synthetic a priori truth. And the example of red is closer to orange than it is to yellow
is an example of one such truth. And we'll see many more true when done. And law is full of such
truths. So for Kant, however, then synthetic a priori truths can recognize synthetic a priori
truths. He thought you made a mistake by not recognizing them. And commonly, people do hold
that you made that mistake. Even you probably thought he made that mistake, although he didn't
think it was a mistake. But he didn't make it. That's what he didn't know.
So Kant thought that the only a priori synthetic truths are truths of Euclidean geometry and
Newtonian physics. That's about it. Causality, space and time.
For the Munich picture book philosophers, however, there are synthetic a priori truths
everywhere in every aspect of the out. And so this is just a few examples.
Just to start with, then this is more. And we'll see many more. These are just the first
set. All of these were dealt with by the Munich phenomenologists one way or another.
There's even an a priori theory of chemistry that was worked out by one of the female members
of the Munich school. All right, now what that's I've said, Reinhardt is important primarily for
his theory of speech acts. But I think he's even more important for a concomitant discovery,
which changes our whole view of the history of philosophy, I believe. And it's a view about
how entities exist in time. So for Plato, everything which exists is unchanging.
We can only have knowledge about unchanging truths about the heavens, for instance, the
geometry of the stars, because of course, they never change. Anything on earth, we can only have
beliefs about these beliefs will be guessing. Because things are changing on the earth,
so we can't really know. But we can only know about the ideal entities, such as numbers,
values and so forth. Now, another sort of history, and this was the typical American 20th century
account, says that every sort of history is about things which are always changing,
things which are part of the world of what happens and is the case, things which are subject to
causality. They're changing all the time, you're changing all the time, even this changing,
even this table is changing, even a slump of granite is changing all the time, because it's
losing atoms very slowly, but still. So this is the standard 20th century view, it's the standard
view often ascribed to Hume. And what Reinhacht did is, this is Aristotle's view. Aristotle thought
that there are empirical things, so he was an improvement on Plato. Plato thought everything
was unchanging. Aristotle recognized that they were changing things like organisms,
which were at the heart of his philosophy. Reinhacht recognized that there are ideal entities,
or entities which have the feature of ideal entities that they're not affected by causality
and by causal change, but which are rooted in history because they are made by humans.
So there are three sorts of history. There is the Platonic history of things like numbers,
there is the empirical history of things like people, and then there is the
a priori history of things like claims and debts and property rights and many, many other things
that we'll talk about in due course. Architectural plans would be an example, chemical sequences
would be an example, gene sequences maybe would be an example. These are all entities which
exist in history from a certain point, but which do not change. And until they cease to exist,
so you pay off your debt, the debt ceases to exceed, for instance, or you synthesize a molecule,
but it's so difficult to keep the molecule in existence that after a while you stop synthesizing
it, but that molecular pattern did exist for a certain period of time in the world of reality,
not just in the world of patterns. All right, so Anita Stein had a similar view about the state.
Now, states change, but there is something which she discusses in her big book about
the state, which is unchanging about a state, and it's in the same ballpark as things like
debts and claims. It's things like authority. All right, now, so Reinhardt was the principal
advocate of this view. He was, the view is extended even further in very interesting ways,
as we will see by Ingaarden, his pupil and friend, and by Edith Stein and by some of the other
unifinomenologists, but it was him who showed how we can make progress in developing an ontology of
these entities of the third kind, which arise particularly in the realm of social ontology.
And so there are various different kinds of social acts. The word social act was used also by Thomas
Reid when he was talking about what we nowadays call speech acts, but not all social acts are
speech acts. Many social acts are document acts. And in November, we're going to have a visiting
speaker or a visiting Zoomer who is going to be talking about not speech acts and not document
acts, but device acts. An example of a device act would be a clock. And anyway, there are many
other more interesting examples of device acts, but he is really keen on clock. All right, you can
see some of the details of what we'll be doing in November. In November the 6th, I think it is,
on the wiki page, but that's a work in progress. That particular entry in the program is a work
in progress, as indeed are most of the entry, depending on how well I do in finishing this
today. All right, so social acts are informing, questioning, requesting, commanding,
promising. Rainer worked out some of all of those things, and they each have an experience which
underlies them. So if you make a command, then you have to have a volition, a will, that the
command be executed. That's an essential law. It's a necessitation. And now, of course, there are
some lazy generals who just, it looks as if they're issuing commands, but they don't care,
they're just reading what their adjutant has given them, but they're not commanding, according
to Rainer. Just as if you tell a lie when you say, I'll give you $100 tomorrow, you're not making a
problem. Now, clearly, we see how Rainer deals with those kinds of cases in a little bit. So
enactments are what lawmakers do when they enact a law. For instance, when the mother decides what
time the children have to be home at night. And then there is an outcome, which might be a state,
a state of affairs, or something like that. So the state, which is the outcome of informing is
that the informee now knows the thing which the informer was informing her about.
And asking a question similarly, and there is another beauty phenomenologist, which I'm not
going to talk about, a man called Daubert, who did a great deal of work, very interesting work,
on these kinds of questions, including on the question of questions. And I, along with the
co-auth editor of Rainer's works, whose name is Carl Schumann, I wrote a paper about this man.
And he's called Johannes Daubert. And he's interesting because he never published a word in
his life. He was probably the most important figure in the Munich school. He was the one figure in
the Munich school who was allowed to criticize Husser to his face. But he was a farmer. He didn't
need a degree. He came into the university, discussed, and wrote notes. And he wrote
thousand pages of notes. And like Husser, he used the secret shorthand. And my colleague now,
unfortunately, not here, was the first person to decide for the secret shorthand. And so we were
able to publish some of his unpublished shorthand notes. And a lot of them were about questions.
So we published a paper about questions based on Daubert. And at that point, there was practically
nothing published about Daubert. Nobody knew the name. The A-U-B-E-R-T. So we start the paper by saying,
as is well known, Johannes Daubert has, I can't exactly how it goes on. All right, this is in
garden. And he's at age about 36 here. And so he's part of the Munich school along with Schäler,
who we will meet a little bit later and right now. And along with the early Husser, who was himself
engaged in just the same sort of work, but at the formal level rather than at the domain
specific level. This is the old Bodleian library in Oxford. And in 1971,
this is the old, I wasn't in there. I was in the new Bodleian library, which is much more boring.
But by accident, I found a copy of this book. And it changed my life. I opened it and I saw
tables of different kinds of modes of being, and then also tables of how these different
kinds of modes of being represent themselves in the past or present or the future, or in
speculation, hypothesis, fiction and so forth. And until that point, I had wanted to, as I said,
I wanted to write a PhD on aesthetics and mathematics. I already knew the name in garden,
and I knew that he was known for his writings on aesthetics, which is why I picked up the book.
But when I saw what he was doing with ontology, which was for him more important than aesthetics,
just he wrote about ontology primarily in Polish, which was a kind of hurdle.
So I immediately saw that I was going to write a PhD on ontology.
And I spent the rest of my life working on ontology. This was even more important than
Wittgenstein's tractators. This is the most important book in my life. And we'll see where
it comes from in a minute. Since Ingaard never wrote a book called Time and Modes of Being
in any language. All right, what he did was write a book called Controversy over the existence
of the world, which was published as part of Ingaard's contribution to the Polish war effort.
He was a bit late, but still. So he'd written everything before then in German, because that's
the language of science. It was then anyway. And so that was the language of phenomenology.
He was studying in Göttingen and collaborating with phenomenologies most of whom were German.
So it was published in two volumes, the second of which in some versions has two parts, so three
volumes. And then at a later stage, he wrote a third volume, so one, two, one, two, two, and then
three. And the third volume was published in German in 1974. The whole first two volumes were
published in English only recently. However, I can read German, so I knew the German edition
of this big book already quite well. And above all, I knew about Ingaard's book on the literary
work of art very well. So that was probably the third most important book in my philosophical career.
It's an amazing book because it's not technical, but it contains a whole amount of new information
about what literature involves. And it's information which is new, but information which you can't
help but realize is being true. In other words, it's not surprising, but it's not boring either.
And you see, it's an investigation on the borderlines of ontology, logic, and theory of language.
So his job here was an ontological job. He realized this ontological job by writing about
literature. And I will explain how that works in a minute. And then in another book, which again
was published only recently in English, but which this one was published first in 1931 in German.
And the other one, too, was published in 1931. There are many other writings of Ingaard, and these
are just the important ones for our purposes. Most of them were published first of all in German.
So this is the big book, volume one, Controversy over the Existence of the World.
And in this book, he distinguishes four kinds of dependence. Now, he's coming
from the logical investigations where relations of dependence are very important,
but he's looking at relations, varieties of relations of dependence. So one variety
is the dependence of a fictional character on its author. And then everything about the
fictional character is determined by the author. Without the author, there would be no physical
character. And there is no truth about the fictional character, which was not determined
by the author. That's called heteronymous dependence, or just heteronomy. Derivation
is a matter of coming into existence. So a baby is dependent on a mother and a father, too,
for coming into existence, but not for continually existence. And then
an entity is dependent on another entity in the non-self-sufficient input sense,
if the one entity needs to coexist in a single hole with the second entity. An example of this would
be color and extension. You can't have color without having some extended thing or extended space.
And then just plain vanilla dependence is depending on another entity in order to remain
in existence. So John's love for Mary goes out of existence if John dies. So John's love for
Mary is dependent in this plain vanilla sense, because it depends on remaining in existence
upon John. So this is the same story, but with examples. So derived entities are entities which
are dependent on something for beginning to exist. There's only one really good example of a non-derived
entity, and that's God. Everything else had to come from somewhere else, except whatever happened
just before the big bang. I don't know. But I'm sure there was something else just before the big
bang. And so even what was there just before the big bang was derived from something prior.
And then non-self-sufficient would be a color, and self-sufficient would be an apple or a person
or a planet. And then dependent in the plain vanilla sense would be a mammal is dependent upon
oxygen for its remaining in existence. But otherwise it's independent. It's not dependent upon any.
All right. So these are the four existential moments of dependence and independence.
And entities can have various combinations of these three kinds of dependence. So God is not
dependent on anything foreign. He's an absolute. His mode of existence is absolute. Nearly everything
else is very dependent. Fictional characters are very dependent. And in order to understand dependence
in gardens, started to work on the structure of military work. What are fictional characters?
So there is this paper by a poll called Hood's Simpsky, who hangs around in Austria these days,
which summarizes all of what I just said. The gray is the non-realizable.
So I don't think I'm going to go into details, but you trust me that this is a pretty good
account of what is possible given in God's approach. And this is only one part of the approach.
That's why he needs such a big book in four parts, because he wants to solve the problem of the
existence of the work. He wants to show herself who died before it was finished that realism was correct.
And this diagram here yields eight possible modes of being. And so the real world has to be one of
these eight, because these are the only options. And God is the first one, A1. And we'll come,
well, we can look at the others in a minute. So
I don't need to go into this detail. So this is a picture now of all the different categories.
There are ideal entities, which are not actual. They can't move, they can't think,
they can't do anything. There's one absolute being, which is God, which is actual. And God is
original and autonomous. And then everything else is derivative of our heteronomy. So derivative
are present continuance, like people and planets. And a slightly weaker form, which in God calls
post-actual, are past continuance, which are things like Julius Caesar and President True.
And you see, as we go from God to the present God, to the present events, and then to the past
events, and then to the future events, which are only possible, they're not actual in any
sense. We're getting weaker and weaker until we get to the non-actual, which are what in God
and the cause purely intentional objects, which are heteronomous and therefore derivative,
because they depend upon something else, which is true. And so we have something like a great
chain of being from absolute being to shell opponent. And so these are the eight possible
modes of being. So we have God and the time entities. And then we have ideal entities like
deck, plane, mortgage, and so on. Then we have present continuance, present processes, present
events, purely intentional entities and purely intentional entities of a weaker kind. And so
Inga wrote the literary work of art in order to show why idealism is wrong. Idealism would say
that the real world does not go here, present continuum, which is where we would want it to
go. So idealism says the real world does not go under present continuance. So how is he going to
show that the real world does not go under present continuance? Well, the only alternative option
is that the real world is, and this is the idealist view, the real world is a purely intentional
object. Purely intentional object is dependent upon, in all respects, for all its qualities, on some
author, some creator, some, some origin. And every creator of every literary work has only a finite
amount of time and therefore only a finite amount of text to determine all the qualities of its
fictional character. Therefore, qualities of fictional characters are always spotting.
They have loci of indeterminacy in Inga's terms. No real entity has loci of indeterminacy,
because for every real entity, if we have a question about any quality, we can always ask that,
answer that question by measuring or by investigating more closely. We can't find out
how tall Hamlet was by measuring. And the same applies to Sherlock Holmes, unless
Conan Doyle tells us that he was exactly five feet 11. But then we Watson, we still wouldn't
know how tall he was. And we wouldn't know many other things, but Sherlock Holmes and Watson and
their dog and the kind of whiskey they drank and so on. So this is the argument. This is why the
book on literature was a contribution to the resolution of the controversy over the existence
of the world, which Inga and Hustel have been fighting for the whole of their lives. So this is
a picture of a literary work. The basis of the literary work, this is, these are strata that
she wrote. And as soon as you've written literature work, you've created all the literature. So you
have word sound, because when you read a novel or a poem, you hear the words, even if you don't
hear them with your ears, you hear them with your mind. And you probably hear Shakespeare wrong.
Because Shakespeare Shakespeare's plays were written at a time when English people
spoke the combination dialect of Yorkshire and Danish, which doesn't sound at all like English,
but still that we hear we hear sound when we meet Shakespeare. When people perform Shakespeare,
they typically perform it in a non Yorkshire, Danish dialogue. Then we have meaning units,
because we understand the meanings of the sentence. And higher order meaning structure,
what enable us to visualize the places and the events and so forth. Then we have what
he calls schematized aspects, including quasi-century aspect, which are things like the color of
Juliet's hair and so on, which are spotty. Then we have the objects events and safety affairs
and adult, which all of these graphics for Juliet and Hamlet and Romeo and so on and so on and so
on and so forth. Here, as it is, Baker Street and Florence and Moscow. So Moscow is not present
in war and peace. It's not about Moscow. It's about Moscow here. And it would still be about
Moscow here. There was no Moscow in Russia. All right. And then we have at the very top,
and these are not necessary, value qualities, metaphysical qualities and other
features of a literary work, which exist from a certain point in time, if you're dealing with a
work which has a certain value. All right. Now, if you look at a musical work, you only have two
strapped. If you're lucky, you only have two strapped. Typically, you only have one,
namely the bangs and whistles, which make up the musical work. But sometimes you have value
qualities. It's a great musical work. But you don't have any of the rest. It is an opera,
and you have even more of it. And Inga deals with four different kinds of works of art
in this book. So an architectural work is not identical to the building,
because the architectural work can be spoiled, changed, destroyed even, and the building may
be the same. For instance, if you build a sequence of really ugly towers around the work and put
Mickey Mouse features on the top of the tower, then you've spoiled the architectural work,
but the work itself hasn't changed. So that's Inga then. So the scientific work doesn't have
any of the metaphysical qualities, and it doesn't have any word sounds. The sounds do not play a
role in that scientific work. And journalists, he has a paper on what he calls borderline cases
of literary works, which deals with things like journalism, etc. The difference is that
a literary work represents represented objects. So they are heteronomous. They're purely
intentional. Whereas scientific work, if you're lucky, represents objects and events and states of
affairs in the world. That's why there is no corresponding stratum inside the work, because
the stratum is outside the work. And then we have intentionality going through the representations
in texts and symbols to the objects in the world. Alright, now this summarizes what I said earlier.
So we will pause here and if there are any questions. Yes.
Yes, so he thinks that the past is such that I have to be very careful here.
The past doesn't exist. No, it's not actual, but it was once actual, and that's a pretty strong
kind of being. The future is not even future actual, because it may never happen. So the
future is always somehow probabilistic. And I think that's as far as he goes. He doesn't have a
sophisticated theory of time, to my knowledge. I'm sure he has lots of things to say about time,
but not in regard to the ontology. He talks about why he has this particular treatment of
past, present, and future. So time and modes of being, the book that I mentioned, is in fact
an English translation of parts of volume one of the controversy.
I just want to go back, I guess, to when you're talking about change versus
unchanging and debt. Is that an example? How does that fit into dependency? And why is debt
unchanging? Yes, so I lend you five dollars. You have to give me five dollars within the week.
That debt just comes into existence. And then if you give back the five dollars, then it's
doesn't change. It doesn't become more intense, or less intense. It's just the debt just there.
And there are many other things which are just there. For instance, if I was king of England,
we would have one. I could make you a knight. You don't become British, but your knighthood
would exist. It wouldn't change at all. And there are many, many others.
And where would that go into dependency? So the debt is dependent upon the
debtor and the debtee. And there are different things to be said, depending on whether it's
a debt which is captured in some kind of document or not. And it could be that the debt is
captured in the document. And that that document serves then as the basis for other
debts or other claims and so forth. But in the simple case, it's just
a simple relation between human beings. And it's a thick relation.
The a priori? Everything I just said, I think it's a priori. In other words, you understood
what I said and you nodded your head. So that's all you need. Yeah.
The huge schema with older categories, that's in the 1960s.
That is present already in the Polish book, which was published in 1947.
That is like dealing with so many things that have been
English-speaking throughout the martial arts. Yeah, of course. These were really good philosophers.
And you can read it in English now. That's it, isn't it?
Yeah, the real problem is that each column is one hundred something dollars.
Well, you can borrow, you can share, I don't know.
Library with that. Yeah. If it's not in the UB Library, then tell me and I will tell them to order.
You said that in the old schema of God is absolute. Is that a term you use?
That's his term. I just realized that the final book written by Yiddish Stein is called
Absolute and Finite? Finite. Yes, so there is a book of letters between Ingarden and Yiddish Stein.
And so they were communicating with each other constantly. I think, I don't know when the
communication stopped for a long time. And so they were, I'm sure, exchanging ideas
about philosophy as well. But I wouldn't want to say who was the more creative of the two.
I think I could say that Ingarden was the more formalistic. Do you like lists and things?
I like lists. I like pictures. When I'm working on a new topic, the first thing I do is
put the name of the topic in Google and then ask for all the images.
Can you just go to the bottom of the book as we do on the right list?
So the question is, are my sons serious? That's going to be the main one.
So the bluntness of, or the lusciousness of, or the right shininess of them.
So it occurs to me that we should send this around.
Your name is already there. Otherwise, put your name on there.
I'm not going to do anything with that sheet. I just want to know who's here.
Yes. So I'm back to his idea of time for existence on moments of dependence.
How much weight should we keep for the moments? I'm thinking, he kind of sounds like a grown
block theorist. So would it be something like the particular time slice that I think of it that way?
No, the moments are that they derive from the dependence-theoretic approach to sense data that
Husserl developed. Here, he took this from Stumpf, who was earlier and who specialized in
tone psychology, that psychology of music basically are. So if you have a musical tone,
you have a pitch, you have a timbre, and you have a loudness. They are moments of the pitch.
And similarly, in Gunn said, modes of being have moments, and you have to have one or
other of these. You have to have one of each moment, but the moments might be high or low,
if I still present the song. And so he worked out the moments of being and then had a way of
combining the moments to create modes of being. And then he could use that to solve the problem
of idealism and really. So Ingaardin did not say that the strata of the literary work are dependent
on the author. They are dependent for their origin on the author. But in order to be maintained in
existence, they need readers. And a different population of readers will be responsible for
maintaining the literary work in existence. And so literary works do indeed change. They're not like
debts or dollars, or they change. And that's why I put this curve here. They could even die
if no one reads them anymore, or if all copies done this job. But they still have some of the
characteristics. So they don't change the causal reason. They change because the readership
has different tastes, reads new nuances, which may or may not have been there on the part of the
author, sees a political meaning that may or may not have been there on the part of the author.
So Shakespeare's plays have already changed in a big way on the sound level. And they're trying to
change them these days also on various political and avant-garde interpretation levels. So literary
works are still examples of ideal entities of the third kind, but they change because they are
dependent upon things like audiences, critics, editions, editors, and so forth. So are they,
so under this theory, are literary works fully determined, but under determined by the author,
like the full determination of the audience? Yeah, so that's a very good question.
I don't... Ingaarden was a fan of very realistic late 19th century novels, if that helps you.
Yeah. And his proof, he says that in conclusion, idealism is false. Can it also just be saying
idealism is fiction? Well, no, because if we go back to scientific work, so scientific work is
meaning to be about the world. And the philosopher idealists who developed these theories did indeed
believe that the world is just a fiction. They thought that it was a fact that the world is a
fiction, where a fictional author doesn't hold that the world he's describing is a fact. It's
moving. Yeah. How do terminists, as some of you, translate a book?
Oh, so yes, so the life of a literary work may bifurcate or multi-furcate if you get many
translations and each translation, you may even get multiple translations in different cultures
then would have a different reading of the work. And so the work itself has a life which involves
multiple personalities. I once gave a talk at a German conference about Heidegger. Actually,
no, it was about translation. And my talk was, had the title Heidegger in German, Heidegger's work
is untranslatable. And there were lots of Heideggerians in the room, many, particularly Japanese
Heideggerians on the row. And the chair of the meeting was Japanese. And before I could even start
the first word, the Japanese all stood up in unison in the Japanese way and they all shouted,
of course, Heidegger can be translated. There are nine different translations of Heidegger
into Japanese. So in other words, I couldn't give my talk, it's the only time in my life I've been
prevented from speaking. All right, so works of art can have complicated lives, that's the
important thing, the life of the literary world. All right, now, I have a lot about Heidegger,
Ingaard's theory of systems, but I'm not going to go through that. I will. Actually, I may be able
to go through it quickly. So in volume three of the controversy over the existence of the world,
which is called the causal structure of the real world, and which is extracted in short form in
in an English text in a book called Man and Value. And the idea here is the idea of
relatively isolated systems. So I am a relatively isolated system, I'm a system, but I'm relatively
isolated because I have a skin, which isolates me relatively from the outside world. The outside
world can still penetrate and I can still penetrate from within into the outside world by speaking
or sweating or throwing or vomiting. But there is the skin and all animals have a hide or a skin
or some kind of closing closure, which which creates this relative isolation, which is a permeable
membrane, which allows us also to expel waste. And so there is one relatively isolated system
and the other relatively isolated systems, we talk to each other, we ask things to each other.
This is supposed to be a mind. So the mind is permeated by the external world in that we see
the external world, we move around within it and touch it. And anyway, if you're interested,
there is this paper called Ingardens Systems Theoretical Philosophical Anthropology.
So you can have tribes which arose from the isolated systems countries. And I have a whole
talk and a whole video on this, which you can dig around and find probably. So the world consists of
and this is why I want to include this just briefly. So I have lots of blood cells in my body,
which are moving around independently. They are the only parts of my body, which are not connected
by me to some kind of tube or pipe to other parts of my body. So my lungs are connected to other
things which are connected again to other things. But blood cells are not tied to anything else.
But all those linkages are relatively tiny. In other words, they are tubes which fit into a
large thing like the kidney or the heart and allow transmission of fluids and gases.
Rather like wires in the good old days allow transmission of most code messages.
So this is a picture of some of these tubes. And it's important that there's one rather
interesting tube here, connecting the mother to the placenta. And then there's something else
which goes here, which it's not so relevant. Actually, it is relevant. It's what I'm talking
about now. So there is a school of thought. It's not Irish. I think it's Dutch. It's in
Europe anyway, which says that the embryo or the fetus is a part of the mother.
And the argument is that it's connected and it's inside the mother. But if it's connected
by means of a tube, then that doesn't mean that it's a part of the mother. I could be connected
by means of wires to my headquarters. And the wires could be continuous. And my job is to transmit
most code messages to headquarters. That doesn't mean I'm a part of the person who's answering
my most code messages. And similarly, the fact that there is a connection which is going to be
disconnected very beautifully and smoothly when the time comes doesn't mean that the thing which
it's connected to is a part of the connecting system. So this is one system. And in this paper,
called 16 Days, which is about the ontology of the embryo, embryo ontology. So this
is the discipline of the gerontology. We argue that the embryo is, well, we don't need to argue
this. In those days, it was obvious to everybody. Now it's obvious to everybody except these four
or five Dutch and European ladies to work on. The metaphysics of pregnancy. And their main
thesis is that the fetus, once it's become attached to the mother, is a part of the mother.
And that's why the mother can abort the fetus any time she likes, because it's a part of it. So
it's like having your fingernails cut. Anyway, we argue that the embryo, let me get this right,
that the organism, which is the eventual baby, begins to exist at the latest 16 days after fertilization.
And in it, we say that the embryo is, I say this is what my line is. I don't know,
they're buried. It's not responsible for this time. We say that the relation between the fetus
and the mother is rather like the relationship between a tub of yogurt and refrigerate.
All right, that's what we say. And so in all their papers, these
metaphysicians of pregnancy, they quote that line. They don't quote the arguments,
they quote that line. They say, obviously, Smith is wrong. Therefore, the baby is a part of the
mother. But I say quite explicitly that you can be an object and still be connected by a pipe
or a conduit or some kind of wire. And that's what happens with the baby, that it's connected
by a conduit. And the actual surface area of the baby is much bigger than the thickness of the
conduit. And the same applies to lungs and kidneys and livers and so forth. They are objects too.
And they are part of the mother, because they have the same genetics. They have the same source
of food and oxygen and so forth as the mother. The baby doesn't have the same genetics as the mother.
So that's one of many reasons why the baby is not a part of the mother. So the baby is a system,
which is inside another system, but not as part and not as a subsystem therefore,
because a subsystem is always a part, but rather as an independent system, which is connected by
means of the tube. So here ends the first lesson. Let me get back to the main track.
We'll come back to most of that later on. This is Yorbsland Weber who taught me a lot about systems.
That's the book where we express this complicated theory of systems, complex system.
Now let's talk about Max Schäler. Max Schäler was a very interesting character. So he was the
Catholic Nietzsche, they say. That was how he was described. In other words, he was very,
what's the word, conspicuous. He wasn't a dedicated follower of fashion. He was a creator of fashion.
So during the First World War, he was the leading spokesman for the anti-British
campaign, because the British are just grossers. So we can't take them seriously. They have no
spirit, no geist. And so it's okay to beat them in a war. And he was a Catholic at various
points in his life, but then when he unconverted himself and then reconverted himself. And some
of the times when he was unconverted, he was also a professor of Catholic theology in the
University of Cologne. His sex life was very complicated. I can't remember the
I can't remember the whole story, but the one story which I do remember is that on the morning of
one of his marriages, he wrote, sent a telegram to another woman, explaining that she was the only
woman that he ever loved in his life. Which is also not true. I mean that she was the only woman.
Anyway, so it's very, there is a very nice biography by a man called Staud S-T-A-U-D-D
on Shayla's life, which I recommend. But his philosophy is, it's all over the place.
He hasn't been popular in the analytic world as much as he should have been given the good
stuff in Shayla, because there is a lot of embarrassing stuff in Shayla. And I'm going to
try and communicate some of the good stuff. So, and I have Voitywa in yellow here, that's because
some of the good stuff is manifest in Voitywa, who wrote his habitation on Shayla.
All right. Now, Shayla's idea, one of Shayla's main ideas is hysteria of feelings and emotions
and values. Now, it's clear that feelings can be of positive or negative value. So,
a pain is of negative value or negative valence, we can say. And a feeling of joy is a positive value.
But Shayla made a very elaborate technology of values and emotions out of these associations
between certain kinds of feelings and certain kinds of values. He said the only way we can
experience a value is via feeling. So, we don't have intellectual knowledge of values. We have,
let's say, value instances. We know when there is a value there, if we have a corresponding
feeling about what we see or hear. And so, if you see somebody torturing a helpless infant
and you don't feel badness, then that's because you are value-blind. And I think there's some
truth in this. Some people are value-blind. Pathology is a kind of value-blindness. Psychopathology,
the psychopath is somebody who is value-blind with regard to social values of various sorts.
All right. So, Shayla's idea is that the way we access values is through emotions.
And that means that we, sorry, the way we access values is through emotions. And that means that
we can categorize values by looking at the kinds of feelings that they incite. And so,
sensible feelings like itches and smells and so forth, they relate to rather short,
lived values, which are easy to fix, easy to change. So, if you have a toothache, then
if you take an aspirin, then you may, if you're lucky, be able to change it. So,
you can, there's a mechanical means to change these things. And this means that they are very
low in the value of value. Then we have what he calls vital feelings, which are bigger and
strengthened on the positive side and tiredness and weakness. So, you can see nature coming in here
on the negative side. Then we have psychic feeling states, such as euphoria and happiness and sympathy
and sorrow and anger and jealousy. And these come forth in all kinds of interesting psychosocial
phenomena like love and hate and empathy and so forth. And we can alter them through acts of
free will and through positive social interactions, he said. And then at the very top, we have spiritual
feelings, which are somehow absolute. They don't belong to the ego anymore. And the examples he
likes are all religious ones, bliss or wonder, catharsis on the positive side and then shame,
despair, remorse, anxiety, conscience and grief on the negative side. And these we can't usually
manipulate. If we have a feeling of bliss, then that's by the grace of God. It's not anything that
we can engineer. And we can't will ourselves to be in a state of awe. Either it happens or it doesn't.
And so, from this, we get hierarchy of values. So, we started at the bottom. There are utility
values, which of course, don't matter to us just for the British. Then there are sensual feelings,
which meant to things being agreeable or disagreeable. And then we have feeling states of the lived body,
which are correspond to mental values and vital values that I told earlier. And then psychic
feeling states correspond to mental values and spiritual feeling states correspond to the values
of the holy and the unholy. And this gives you a hierarchy. So, we have sacred at the top,
then wisdom, then virtue and then utility. All right. So, so much for this is Sheva's
big book, 600 pages or so. The idea is that formalism in ethics is the kind of ethics which
can be captured in axioms like the categorical imperative of Kant, which Sheva hated. So,
he thought that that's much too formalistic, much too intellectualistic values have to do with,
and therefore ethics have to do with feelings. The feelings are the basis of ethics. And the
get-out then is precisely something that will suffer from a violent line. So, the usual argument
against the view that feelings are the basis of ethics is that some people don't have the right
ethical feelings. And there is a very nice treatment of Fender's theory of the human world,
which I've linked to the wiki page. So, Fender was another member of the Munich school. In the book
on AI, we have a section on Sheva's theory of the will. But since we wrote the book,
I found this paper, and it is in fact a better account of the Munich understanding of will,
and therefore also of emotions. All right. So, this is Sheva's account, not Fender's account
of will. So, a man, I could have been a woman, but a man sees a drowning child and experiences a
feeling, it has to be a feeling, of moral obligation to save the child, and wills himself to save the
child and jumps in. And then Shaila says that we have overlapping stages, and we need to understand
the will by looking at these overlapping stages. We get the same change, stages, wherever action
occurs, in other words, because action always occurs on the basis of some act of will. So,
these are the stages, and Fender's theory is more detailed than this, and I think better also,
but this won't do for here. So, there is a presence to the acting person of the object,
the baby falling in the lake. A presence in the mind of the acting person, we could see a safe
guys, of the content to be realized, and of the sending value feelings, value feelings,
he feels that he has to jump in. And then there is a decision, and the decision that the actor
deciding of three parts, there's forming intention, deliberating how to affect the rest, so once you
decide you're going to rescue the baby, then you need to decide how you do that, and whether you'll
call the police first. And then the third part is the most important part, that's when you resolve,
that's a mental act of resolving, but that takes place at the same time as molecular
signaling events in your brain. And Shayla is, for this reason, as for many others,
to be taken seriously, even today, because he was never a Cartesian Jewelist. He always believed in
the mind, body, as being one thing rather than two things. So, these two things are both happening
simultaneously, and they are in some sense, they're two sides of the same coin, and that is where the
will actually kicks in, where you have a connection between the relevant parts of the decision and
the actual triggering of the event. And it would look like this, or so this is stage three C up here,
and that's stage four, but they're connected by nerves. And there's nothing here that we
can predict. So, one of the reasons why we can have no AI will, which Yorkson and I have argued
at length now, is because we'd have to predict that there would be this simultaneous decision,
and in the case of the AI, there's going to be a mechanical effect. And we can't do that in the
way which corresponds to what we understand as will when we are human beings willing. And Turing,
so in other words, we can have no mathematical model of this. And Turing says that we can only
model what we can describe mathematically. Now, the reason why will is so important for AI
is the same as the reason why we still, after 50 years, have no working chat box. AI can't do ordinary
everyday conversation. And the reason why it can't do ordinary everyday conversations, because
ordinary everyday conversation is soaked through with acts of will. We engage in conversation
because we want something. Immediately that we engage and we want something else because of the
response. And that the will ties what ties the conversation together. And that's why you hate
calling your bank on the phone, because there's no will. It's a tie you together.
All right, now, so the life world, I will talk about this at some other stage.
I don't think we need to go into this really.
Yeah, so we'll do this one. So
both Hussal and Shayla were, even though they were interested in the real world,
even Hussal was interested in the real world in his early writings,
we're not really interested in physics, or in chemistry, or in the sciences of the real world.
So, Hussal, sorry, Shayla used the term me lia to refer to the life world that we are living in,
which is a kind of simplified chamber, which extends as far as we can see,
and as far as we can influence, but it's not the real world because it has rules of its own.
So he says, the sun of the media, human beings is not the sun of astronomy, the meat that is stolen
bought on what have you is not the sum of cells and tissues with the chemical physical processes
which take place within them. Now, of course, he's just wrong
that that meat contains molecules. If somebody asks you to give you a drink that doesn't contain
any chemicals, then you know that they are wrong because every drink contains nothing but chemicals.
All right, so now this is another piece of history. So, when I first arrived in
Buffalo, the chair was a close friend of the previous chairman called Marvin Farber,
who was one of the leading phenomenologists in the United States, and he wrote a book on Hussal,
he hired phenomenologists, and the man who started this Marvin Farber lectures,
I think I was the only person who gave him that lecture. He wanted me to talk about
European philosophy, he had lectures, so I agreed. And so we started with Brentano,
who was the teacher of Hussal and responsible also for Polish philosophy and for Ustaz psychology
and many other things, that's where we start and the influence of Brentano on the Vienna circle.
And then Wittgenstein and the poets, I've forgotten what I had to say in that particular lecture,
but I do have the tapes somewhere. And then Kafka and the philosopher, so I've written about
Kafka and Brentano. Kafka attended lectures in philosophy and was known to philosophers,
he was known to them, they were known to him, although they didn't know about his
novels because they were written later. And then I have a chapter on Wojtyła,
Kazimierz Fardowski was Brentano's leading light in Poland. And then we have Hussal Heidegger
and the Crisis of European Sciences, I missed some out, so this is a shortened version of a
longer list. Then there's an lecture on the ink garden, then it begins to become even more
controversial, from Jürgen Hallermas to the Barden-Meinhof gang, and then the final lecture
was called Daring down the Suicide of Philosophical Reason. And the short form is writing to death.
And so the reason why I bring this up is because during this period I was actually
working on the philosophy of Karol Wojtyła. And this fits because it draws exactly on the
theory of the will of Sheila. So Wojtyła wrote a book,
the title is Person and Act, but an English translation was created which is somewhat
controversial because the translation involved parts which were not written by Wojtyła, they were
written by the translator, who claims in a very famous series of journalistic excitement events
a few years ago that she was involved with Wojtyła. And there was something going on between the two
of them, but I'm sure it was not anything, it could probably be called love, at least not
in his direction. Anyway, so there is now a new version of this book, I don't know whether it's
in English, but there is a new version in, well actually this looks as if it is in English.
This is part of the English critical edition of the works in Karol Wojtyła, volume one in fact,
so Person and Act. So Wojtyła was a philosophy student and a philosophy professor actually,
as well as being a priest. And in order to become a professor in most countries in Europe you have
to do two dissertations, one is the doctrine and the other is called a habitation, it's just a
thick doctrine and in France thick means a thousand pages. And the story I like to tell is that every
German philosophy professor has to write at least two books, one is on Hegel and the other is on
Hegel. And well Sheila was the main topic of Wojtyła's habitation, but Aquinas is playing a role
also because Wojtyła was a priest and so philosophy for priests is Aquinas and Cometries on Aquinas.
So it's a study of the human person, now Ingaarden talked about Strafer of the literary work
and Ingaarden Wojtyła were friends, so I'm sure that there was some interaction between them
in the English translation of the acting person, the original one, I haven't read the new one.
The word structure is used, but many of the passages suggest that stratum would be more
appropriate as we will see. So there are strata of the human person which are common to all persons
and to all human action and his book is about the strata. Jesus Christ is not mentioned anywhere
in the book, theology is not mentioned anywhere in the book, truth is mentioned and you know what
he means when he talks about truth, but he's not talking about what he means. And so Reinach has
an important distinction in his theory of speech acts. So there are two kinds of speech acts,
one kind of speech act, sorry there are two kinds of uses of language, one kind of use of language,
you're just speaking, you're not trying to act in such a way that the person you're speaking to
will be changed. So if someone says what time is it, you say four o'clock then that's not really a
speech act. So the difference has to do with what Reinach calls upon, phase doings of a person.
So like kissing or kicking or choosing and deciding, these are internal doings and speech acts are
both internal and external, they're internal because they involve you willing to act in a
certain way, but they're external because you act by speaking and that you're speaking to someone
else you want to change that other person. So this distinction between what merely happens in
person and what is a spontaneous doing of that person is the core of pointy words, account of
the human person. So these strata are what he calls enduring dynamic centers. So we're constantly
acting but on different levels and we're constantly having things go on inside our body on different
levels including physical things like blood flow and so forth, breathing and the trick is to try
to unify all of these dynamic strata and of course sometimes you fail and in working to
unify all your dynamic strata you create yourself. So acting, he says, is the first of many
dynamisms, it's conscious and but consciousness too is a dynamism so already action involves
another strata which is a conscious strata, you can be conscious without acting and when you act
you are conscious that you're acting but the action belongs to a different dynamism
from the consciousness and then they both depend upon various bodily dynamisms and then the question
is how do you how do you unify all of these dynamisms and these are five. So when we act
we experience our action as a doing of which we are the entity because we who are acting
we're causally responsible. We are aware that it reflects certain conscious processes called
desires typically that sometimes it's a bearer of a moral value or disvalue and then he says
that a drama of good and evil within ourselves which is another kind of dynamism and it reflects also
so I'm not sure what he means here these I think are his words so I think it means that
it reflects your consciousness of other actions that you've been taking and then it reflects and is
entwined with the external reality in which the action takes place including the external
reality of the other person that you are acting in relation to and of all their
and then the problem that there is this dynamism of feelings and emotions you see
see how Shayla is playing a role here I'm not going to go through this the problem is that the
harmony sometimes break so you may have an over-emotionalized consciousness and then there's
a struggle struggle between the intense emotions which affect your consciousness and your consciousness
so and that's where if you're lucky conscience will kicks in but sometimes consciousness losing
and then you the person as unity disintegrates and says and freedom you can't be free when
your personality is disintegrated that's what he says here freedom presupposes self-prediction
and freedom therefore presupposes a reference to truth and then there's a long passage here
about conscious conscience so consciousness is another dynamic dynamism which serves to control
over the goodness of the badness of our action so and now this the one interesting aspect is
that he thinks that this creates a solution to the mind body problem and so the mental and
bodily dynamisms are brought to a unity on a higher level constituted by the dynamisms of
human action so human action brings the two together and I'm quoting him now when he says
all men he means all human beings in German the word mensch they mean mensch but that means human
being but it's often translated as millions we will see all right so now we have the we dealt
with the Shayla school I still have a lot to say but I'll do it quickly so the Louvain school
that this priest rescued Husserl's archives from the Nazis took them to Belgium and hid them away
and created the Husserl archive which still exists and there are 40 something volumes
in the collected works which is nothing compared to Heidegger then there is the Liechtenstein
school and this is going very quick so Liechtenstein is here it's 62 square miles and it has its own
prince who is the sovereign and he's a real prince and Buffalo has 52 square miles I lived in Liechtenstein
for four years I was a professor of philosophy this is the royal family of Liechtenstein this is the
royal castle Liechtenstein this is the international academy of philosophy it's now called the
University of Liechtenstein but then it was a very small scale thing it didn't even occupy
this much in the building and I wasn't professor anymore when they moved into this building which
is very hard to reach I could tell you stories about this building but I won't now why was I in
Liechtenstein well on June 14th 1975 I gave my first ever talk to an international meeting
in Krakow in 1975 Krakow was a communist country I had already visited many communist countries but
it was not by any means trivial for an Englishman to visit communist countries it was a bit like
traveling to Europe when Covid was raining I managed to do it but it was not trivial now so
I go to this meeting and I give a talk on Romain ingarden and the aesthetics of mathematical objects
and see that's my dissertation and I can't remember what I said but all of the three
international speakers of this meeting were invited to the Cardinals powers in Krakow which is this
and so the Cardinal was Vaitiwa so I had dinner with Vaitiwa that's now this man was the creator
of the international academy in philosophy he knew that I had dinner with Vaitiwa but more
importantly and it's important because Liechtenstein is a very Catholic country this is a very
Catholic person he was the head of it that the academy was devoted to the philosophy of Vaitiwa
and to the Polish and Munich he was part of the Munich school very late part
so the Munich Polish precursors of Vaitiwa philosophy and he knew that I was the world's
expert on Reinhacht in England so he made me a professor and so I moved to Liechtenstein
and Liechtenstein is a very beautiful country two percent taxes and it's in the mountains
and in the middle of everywhere anyway so there is this Liechtenstein branch of philosophy
Dietrich von Hildebrandt was indeed a member of the original Munich school and Zeifert was his
student I'm not going to talk about Zeifert's philosophy you can read about it if you wish
I thought I would do another chat GPT trip so this Zeifert wrote a book on the philosophy of chess
which I think is his greatest work it's quite short and this is how it's described in his German
wiki page for some reason he doesn't have an English wiki page the German wiki page is very
long and very serious so I think there's been a misprint somewhere a misconnection so this is
just the paragraph about his chess philosophy so I tried in Google translate and it doesn't get
everything right so it says goes in the direction of an objective a priori of the nominal essential
all than empirically given ones necessary circumstances can be exceeded so about here
Google translators gave up and generated nonsense probably that's where they kick in
chatting critique deep L which is a German translation engine better than Google does
better I'm not going to read this but it it's clearly much too long the sentence so no good
English translation would ever have a sentence which is this long so I did a translation this is
the relevant passage in the deep L but I improved it so I cut I cut most of it he shows also the
cast conception of a general a priori I can be improved by stinging from an objective a priori
at the central walls from empirically given necessary states for chess about chess and things
like that so now finally Heidegger he really is a funny man so in being in time Heidegger according
to this the standard in a psychopedic philosophy Heidegger rejects the Hosellian and that means
the Munich notion of formal ontology transforming it into a fundamental ontology which is a
neo Aristotelian serve for what it is that unites and makes possible our varied and diverse senses
of what it is to be I think the English of this is quite good I'm not sure anyone can understand
it for them English is quite good and it shows that there was a kind of break even early Heidegger
was still infused by Shayla things there's a lot of the tone of voice of Shayla in the early Heidegger
and Hosell himself in his copy of Heidegger's being in time says that his formal ontology
is shifted into the anthropological all problematic he's shifting over corresponding to the ego which
is the formal this thing there is Dasein and no one knows what that is in the way that everything
becomes ponderously unclear and philosophically loses its value and then Galen so Galen he's
he's a follower of Shayla the Second World War got in the way of being him being counted as a member
of the he got in the way of a lot of things but he wrote a book called which in the English
translation is called man but in the German it's just damage so he was writing about human beings
which until a few years ago everyone would assume as a matter of course so damage his nature
how would you say that in the human being you can't say its nature and its place in the world
and chapter sorry the third part ends with a section on the Geist problem that we talked about last
week or two weeks ago all right so the background of Galen's work it's a really big and very
interesting work around a book around lots of things and there is a copy of both the German
and the English translation in the university library which is a very good sign of how good
the library is here and that's not just my view there's always good library Marvin Farber I think
was responsible for the quality of the university collection here all right so three aspects to
his work Shayla primatism and philosophical anthropology and so his first idea is that humans
what in German is called mengelwesen which means deficient entities so cats and dogs and
pigs they they are not deficient entities they have a wonderful life in their ancestral
environment and they never have to worry they that's because they have very very powerful
instincts they don't have to think at all they just behave instinctively humans have very weak
instincts we've lost most of our instincts so we have to make up for this loss and what this means
is that we have to use our weak sensory and motor abilities to change the environment to suit our
needs and that means we can live in many different kinds of environments we are as Galen says and
this is a term which Shayla also uses we have world openness so we can plan how we're going to
behave we can plan what kind of environment we behave in we can build a new environment we can
invent new kinds of environments and so forth so game playing games are new kinds of environments
we have these devices called chessboards and so forth new kinds of tourism new kinds of travel
spaceships astrobiology we can live in a world which includes also possible bacteria in distant
galaxies and we do all of these things so a rat wouldn't do any of that because do the same thing
every day we have an excess drive we always want to we go to philosophy lecture we read Arnold
Galen we do all kinds of things we do always new things and there's no equilibrium we never are
settled we die eventually but while we're alive it's always something new and that's why we need
institutions so uh the the um i want i s
that this is going to be the last night so we need institutions which are cultural not natural
because if we don't have institutions then we we're lost because we have such weak instincts
so we have institutions to create things like roads and electricity and electricity supply and so
all those services maybe even tree services but that means that we are by nature cultural being
that is the deep thought i mean if you're teaching the course on nature and culture
that is the deep thought and the part of Galen's argument for this thought
is that we don't know of any human beings who did not have cultural attainments the very earliest
societies are precisely societies with institutions and buildings and so and no matter how primitive
we find them they are still these institutions or cultural attainments they are still so fundamental
the human existence would be i think all without them all right that's the end
good